---
layout: post
category: science
title: 'Random Dot Product Graphs for Food Webs'
published: TRUE
author: gvdr
date: 2015-09-29 1:45
tags: [Food Webs, Evolution, Random Graphs, Phylogenetic Signal]
---

Mine with Daniel Stouffer's paper on how to assess the evolutionary signal of food
webs is out on Oikos as an Early View.

In the paper, we explore some ideas on how to deploy the Random Dot Product Graphs
models for food webs. The RDPG framework offers the possibility of moving some
questions about the evolution of food webs from a quite rigid, binary framework
(that is, the classic interactions matrix representation) to a metric space of
species' abstract functional traits (estimated from that matrix
representation). This offers analytical advantages, for example the possibility
of speaking about *gradual* changes in a food web structure.

_We are eager to hear your opinion about the proposed approach, and happy to work on future application and developments!_

##Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests that an appropriate model for food webs, the
network of feeding links in a community of species, should take into account
the inherent variability of ecological interactions. Harnessing this
variability, we will show that it is useful to interpret empirically observed
food webs as realisations of a family of stochastic processes, namely random
dot-product graph models. These models provide an ideal extension of food-web
models beyond the limitations of current deterministic or partially
probabilistic models. As an additional beneﬁt, our RDPG framework enables us to
identify the pairwise distance structure given by species’ functional food-web
traits: this allows for the natural emergence of ecologically meaningful
species groups. Lastly, our results suggest the notion that the evolutionary
signature in food webs is already detectable in their stochastic backbones,
while the contribution of their ﬁne wiring is arguable.

##Citation
```
@article{dalla2015exploring,
  title={Exploring the evolutionary signature of food webs’ backbones using functional traits},
  author={Dalla Riva, Giulio V and Stouffer, Daniel B},
  journal={Oikos},
  year={2015},
  publisher={Wiley Online Library}
}
```

##Data and Code
All the data we used, and the code we wrote, is freely available on a
public [github repo](https://github.com/gvdr/RDPG_foodweb).
let me know if you need more info (I'll be adding them to the repository shortly).
